	 	CHAPTER 4 – IMPLEMENTATION 4.1 Introduction This chapter explains the implementation phase of the proposed system. The processes, tools, and methods adopted during the implementation of both the front-end and back-end of the system will be explained in detail. Furthermore, the hosting of the system online is also explained in this chapter. By the end of this chapter, a working system is fully developed and ready to be tested in the coming chapter.  4.2 Development Tools and Technologies As stated in previous chapters, the tools and technologies that are involved in the development of the system includes VS Code, MongoDB, Android Studio, Microsoft Azure, Firebase, Postman, and GoogleAPIs. Additionally, the programming language and framework adopted are mainly Flutter, and JavaScript. The description of these tools and technologies has been explained and introduced in the previous chapters, hence there would not be further explanation here. Table 4.1 below shows the distribution of the tools and technologies among the 3 components of the system, which are the SnapAndTax Main API, SnapAndTax Mobile Application, and SnapAndTax Reminder API.    Table 4.1: Development Tools and Technologies Distribution SnapAndTax Main API SnapAndTax Mobile Application SnapAndTax Reminder API Language  JavaScript Tools VS Code Postman Google Apis MongoDB Microsoft Azure Language 	Tools Flutter 	 VS Code Android Studio Language 	Tools JavaScript  VS Code Postman Firebase MongoDB  4.3 Implementation Processes The implementation of the proposed system can be divided into 3 parts corresponding to the 3 main components of the system. The subsections below show the important and noteworthy points in the implementation of those 3 parts ordered in the sequence of their development.  4.3.1 SnapAndTax Main API SnapAndTax Main API is the first part to be developed. It contains all the endpoints and functionalities for the SnapAndTax Mobile Application to use, hence it needs to be developed prior. SnapAndTax Main API is a RESTful API created using NodeJS. Various node module and packages are installed to achieve the required functionality. Figure 4.1 below shows the list of modules installed. / Figure 4.1: SnapAndTax Main API Node Modules List  In the coming subsections, some of the important aspects of SnapAndTax Main API, which includes the Swagger Tools, Database Integration, and Report Generation will be introduced and explain. 4.3.1.1 Swagger This API is a Swagger project initialised with the swagger node package. It allows the API to be created with compliant with Swagger, a specification and documentation tools for APIs. The node package layout a streamlined process of creating and maintaining the API, and at the same time creates the Swagger documentations (a yaml file) that show cases the specifications of the API, including the endpoints available, the operation type for the endpoint, the expected datatype of the input and output, the expected input and output format, and the security measures for the endpoint as shown in Figure 4.2 below. / Figure 4.2: SnapAndTax Main API Swagger YAML Example 4.3.1.2 Database Integration The main database used in this proposed solution is MongoDB. To allow API to have access to the database, the mongoose node package is installed. The database connection string and credentials are stored in the environment file and used by mongoose function to establish a connection. “Models” are created for each existing collections (or can be referred as tables) in the database, the models specify the structure and schema of the responding collection and is used as the interface to access the database. It is used as a way to remove redundancy in codes and standardized the process of accessing database. Figure 4.3 below shows a snapshot of the implementation of model. /Figure 4.3: SnapAndTax Main API Database Model Example Next, the model class can be created and called from anywhere to easily access the needed collection of the database. Mongoose package provides the built-in functions for accessing the database. 4.3.1.3 Report Generation This section documents the overview implementation of report generation feature of the API. As stated in previous chapter, the proposed system has a report generation feature to generate an income or expense report. To achieve that, 2 important node packages are installed, which are the google-chart-node module, and pdfmake module. Pdfmake is a node package to generate a pdf, as its name implies. It allows for the generation of pdf from the server-side and provides a variety of configurations such as font style, page size, addition of table, image and svg, and more. Google-chart-node module on the other hand is a node package to generate a google chart from the provided data which is then converted it into an image. With the help of these 2 modules, a pdf report with charts and tables can be generated. Figure 4.4 below shows an example of the pdf report generated. /Figure 4.4: SnapAndTax Main API Report Generation Example 4.3.1.4 Microsoft Azure Settings and Integration Microsoft Azure is one of the important services used by the proposed solution, as one of the main features, document scanning feature requires the Form Recognizer service by Microsoft Azure to extract the information out from the document submitted.  To start, Form Recognizer service need to be created and enabled. Once the service has been enabled, it can now be called from an endpoint given, or another approach is to use an official node module, namely the @azure/ai-form-recognizer module, which is also the approach adopted in the proposed solution. With the module, the service created can be access by passing in the required credentials. However, an obstacle appeared at this point because the service only accepts document by an URL link, instead of passing the document directly. To address this issue, another Microsoft Azure service is used, which is the Storage service. Similar to Form Recognizer service, there is an official module to access the service, which is the @azure/storage-blob module. The document passed to the API will now be saved in Storage service as a blob. The API will now request Microsoft Azure to generate a Shared Access Signatures (SAS) URL which will exist only for 5 minutes before passing it to Form Recognizer service to extract the information. Figure 4.5 below illustrates the flow of the process for better clarity. 	Document 	SnapAndTax Main SnapAndTax Main submitted from SnapAndTax Main API pass the API stores the 	SnapAndTax 	API request a SAS 	requested URL to document to 	Mobile 	URL to the stored 	Microsoft Azure Microsoft Azure 	Application to 	document from 	Form Recognizer Storage service as SnapAndTax Main 	Microsoft Azure	service to extract blob	API	information Figure 4.5: SnapAndTax Main API Document Scanning Process Flow 4.3.1.5 Tax Calculation The biggest aspect that determines the success of this project is the tax calculation. The calculation performed must be correct and consistent with the current tax scheme to avoid confusion and misguidance to the user. There are a few aspects to be considered when calculating the income tax, namely the income, rebates (PCB and Zakat), deductions / relief, and tax rate. Income and rebates are easy to calculate as it requires simple summation from the income records saved in the database.  Next, deductions are a little complicated. In the system, the deduction retrieved from 2 sources, which are the expenses and tax configuration. Expenses are the deductions that are inflict when user spend their money, such as the medical expenses, alimony, education fees and more. The tax configuration on the other hand is the deductions due to the user’s status, such as disabled, number of children, and more. Each deductions have different amount and limit, making the calculation slightly complicated. Furthermore, the deductions are bound to change every year. To counteract those problems, the details of the deductions must be recorded dynamically and cannot be hardcoded. Thus, the details are saved in the database and be fetched whenever needed. This way, the details is dynamic and can be change whenever. Figure 4.6 below shows the example of deduction details saved in the database. /Figure 4.6: SnapAndTax Main API Deduction Detail Example With the details available on hand, the deductions can now be calculated. The expense records for the desired year are first gathered. Next, those records are organized according to the type which corresponds to the deductions saved in the database. Before moving on to the tax rate, the deduction from tax configuration is also calculated with the save idea. With that the deductions for each category can be calculated. Tax rate is the percentage of the chargeable income after deductions that is subjected to tax. Instead of a fixed percentage, the tax rate differs depending on the amount. For example, the first 5000 is subjected to 0% tax, the next 15,000 is subjected to 1% tax, so on and forth. Similar to the deductions, the tax rate is bound to change every year. Therefore, the same approach is adopted, record in database and fetch whenever needed. Figure 4.7 below shows the example of tax rates saved in the database. /Figure 4.7: SnapAndTax Main API Tax Rate Example Now that the tax rates are available, the tax can be calculated by using the calculation shown above before deducting with.rebates. Figure 4.8 below shows the example response from the calculate tax endpoint. The coming section will show how the data is display on SnapAndTax Mobile Application. / Figure 4.8: SnapAndTax Main API Tax Calculation Endpoint Example Response 4.3.2 SnapAndTax Mobile Application SnapAndTax Mobile Application is a Flutter application designed for Android platform. It will be the interface for user to interact with the system. The development of the system is done on a simulated Android device using Android Studio. To achieve the functionality needed by SnapAndTax Mobile Application, various flutter packages are installed. A few notable packages include dio, an HTTP client library for interacting with RESTful APIs, specifically the SnapAndTax Main API; flutter_bloc, a state management package for managing the application's states; fl_chart, a chart library for producing graphical charts and statistics in the application; Firebase-related packages to fulfill the required Firebase services; and home_widget, a library for creating and managing custom home widgets in the user's device. Figure 4.9 below shows the complete list of flutter packages used. / Figure 4.9: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Flutter Packages List The coming subsections will explain some of the important factors about the component which is divided into State Management, Firebase integration, and Outcome. 4.3.2.1 State Management As stated in the previous section, the state management of the application is fulfilled primarily with flutter_bloc package. Additionally, provider package is also used for minor state management tasks. In simple term, flutter_bloc package allows developers to manage applications states by creating a “bloc”. A bloc consists of 3 components, which are the bloc body which listens to event calls and handles any logic related tasks; bloc event which is used to notify bloc body of an event; and bloc state which is the state returned by bloc body after it receives an event call. The application can interact with the bloc with the built-in function provided by the library. Figure 4.10 below illustrates a simplified example of the bloc state management for the login process for better clarity.  Login Page navigate to home page after receiving “Login Success”  state Start /Authentication Bloc returns a “Login Success” state Login Page request for “Login” event with login credential After receiving “Login” event,  authentication bloc calls the login API endpoint 	 Figure 4.10: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Simplified Login State Management Example Through the creation of blocs for each group of functions, the state of the application can be managed and controlled. 4.3.2.2 Firebase Integration Another important service required by the proposed system is Firebase. In the proposed system, Firebase is used for Google login feature and reminder notification feature. To achieve that, firebase_core, firebase_auth, and firebase_messaging flutter packages are required. Firebase_core is the core package for firebase to work, firebase_auth as its name suggested allows for Google Authentication. Firebase_messaging on the other hand allows Firebase Cloud Messaging service to be integrated into the application. Firebase Cloud Messaging service is a service that allows developers to send a notification to targeted devices from the Firebase console or from an API, which in this case from SnapAndTax Reminder API. 4.3.2.3 Outcome / User Interface This section will display the outcome of the SnapAndTax Mobile Application developed through the use of figures. Figure 4.11 to Figure 4.44 below are the final outcome correspond to the prototype shown in Figure 3.32 to Figure 3.65. /Figure 4.11: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Splash Screen Page  /Figure 4.12: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Login Page /Figure 4.13: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Sign Up Page /Figure 4.14: SnapAndTax Mobile Application OTP Page /Figure 4.15: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Login Loading Page /Figure 4.16: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Home Page /Figure 4.17: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Scan Type Pop Up /Figure 4.18: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Scanner Page /Figure 4.19: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Scanner Confirmation Page /Figure 4.20: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Notification Page /Figure 4.21: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Notification Page (Multiselect) /Figure 4.22: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Profile Page /Figure 4.23: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Edit Tax Configuration Page /Figure 4.24: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Update Password Page /Figure 4.25: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Update Password OTP Page /Figure 4.26: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Incomes Page /Figure 4.27: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Add By Pop Up /Figure 4.28: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Add Income Page /Figure 4.29: SnapAndTax Mobile Application PDF Viewer Page /Figure 4.30: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Income Filter Pop Up /Figure 4.31: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Income Filter Type Pop Up /Figure 4.32: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Income Detail Page /Figure 4.33: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Edit Income Detail Page /Figure 4.34: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Expenses Page /Figure 4.35: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Add Expense Page /Figure 4.36: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Expense Filter Pop Up /Figure 4.37: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Expense Filter Type Pop Up /Figure 4.38: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Expense Detail Page /Figure 4.39: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Edit Expense Detail Page /Figure 4.40: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Reminders Page /Figure 4.41: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Add Reminder Page /Figure 4.42: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Reminders Filter Pop Up /Figure 4.43: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Reminder Detail Page /Figure 4.44: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Edit Reminder Detail Page Aside from these pages that are shown in the prototype, a few new pages are added to further enhance the functionality of the application.  Figure 4.46 below shows the tax summary page, which can be navigated through clicking the summary panel from the home page show in Figure 4.45 below. This page displays the tax related data in detail, showing the total incomes, total PCB, total expenses, deductions categories, and tax calculation steps. /Figure 4.45: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Summary Panel /Figure 4.46: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Tax Summary Page Next, Figure 4.47 below shows the statistics page which can be navigated through clicking the statistic tile from the home page. This page allows the user to have a better view on the statistics charts and also provide some additional information such as the total and average value. /Figure 4.47: SnapAndTax Mobile Application Statistics Page 4.3.3 SnapAndTax Reminder API The last component of the proposed system is the SnapAndTax Reminder API. This is a Node API solely made for the purpose of sending reminder notification to the user. To achieve its functionality, a number of Node packages are installed. The figure 4. below shows the list of packages installed. This API will be running a function at a fixed interval, which is at every 12.00 am of the day. The function consists of 4 steps, firstly, it will search for any reminder that is due from the database. Next, all the unique users of those reminders are then selected. Afterwards, an email reminder will be sent to the respective email address before finally a notification is sent to their respective devices using Firebase Cloud Messaging service. Figure 4.48 below shows the example of the email reminder sent to the user email address.  /Figure 4.48: SnapAndTax Reminder Email Example  4.4 Hosting of The System  The proposed system will be hosted with 2 services which are the Firebase and Microsoft Azure due to several reason. Firstly, the Firebase Cloud Messaging service used in SnapAndTax Reminder API require authentication from the developer. While this can be achieved with various methods including generating a credential key in JSON format and be accessed when required, it suggests a security concern. Therefore, the second method for acquiring authentication is chosen, which is to host the API directly using Firebase, in this case, Firebase can automatically obtain the credentials without the need to provide additional information. The second reason for hosting on different 2 different platform is performance considerations, to save the cost required to host the system, the free tiered or the cheapest subscription are chosen when hosting the system. Therefore, the subscription has various limitations and constraints, hosting everything on the same platform can hinder the performance and possibly exceed the limitation given.  4.4.1 Firebase Hosting As mentioned previously, SnapAndTax Reminder API will be hosted on Firebase. Firebase hosting is rather simple and just required to utilize the Firebase Functions service. There are only 3 steps in hosting in Firebase. Firstly, firebase-tools node package needs to be installed globally on current machine. Secondly, login to firebase is required with firebase login command, and initialization of firebase project is required with firebase init functions command. Finally, deployment can be done with firebase deploy –only functions command. 4.4.2 Microsoft Azure Hosting SnapAndTax Main API on another hand is hosted on Microsoft Azure. There are various ways to host an API on Microsoft Azure such as the Azure App Service, Azure Functions, Azure API Management, Azure Kubernetes Service, Azure Virtual Machine, and Azure Container Instances. Azure App Service and Azure Container Instances are tried and tested in this project. However, various obstacles were discovered during the trial and error of the available services. Azure App Service is the first one tested, however it eventually failed due to the API size exceeded the limit of the subscription, while purchasing the more expensive subscription will resolve the issue but other available services are given a try before concluding. Thus, Azure Container Instances is chosen to host the API.  To host SnapAndTax Main API using Azure Container Instances, a container registry will first need to be created with Azure Container Registries Service. The container registry is used to store the image of an application, in this case SnapAndTax Main API. The container registry will then be used as a blueprint to host the stored application using container instance. To upload the image of SnapAndTax Main API to the container registry, Docker is utilised. Docker first transform the folder of the API into an image following the specified configurations, which is shown in the coming figure. Next, the container registry can be access using Docker login command, and the image can be push with corresponding command in the command prompt using the correct login server address and credential. Figure 4.49 below shows the Docker configuration when converting the API to an image. /Figure 4.49: SnapAndTax Main API Docker Configuration Figure 4.50Figure 4.50: Docker Login and Push Command below shows the Docker login and push command to Microsoft Azure container registry. / Figure 4.50: Docker Login and Push Command As stated previously, once the container registry is created, the API can be hosted by creating a container instance with the container registry selected.  4.5 Conclusion In summary, this chapter explains the implementation phase of the development lifecycle. The development tools and technologies adopted in each of the system component including SnapAndTax Mobile Application, SnapAndTax Main API, and SnapAndTax Reminder API are highlighted, before explaining the implementation process of those system component. Some important aspects during the implementation process are picked and explained in detail along side graphical illustrations for higher clarity. Furthermore, the hosting process of the system is also explained in one of the subsections, showing the reasons and difficulties faced throughout the process and how it leads to the final decision to host on both Microsoft Azure Container Instances service and Firebase Functions service. The coming chapter 5 will showcase the testing phase of the lifecycle, highlighting the functional tests done on the modules of the system with the help of test cases and also usability testing performed by collecting feedback from selected users.  	 